NAME

    logrd - bash logging and stream redirection library

SYNOPSIS

      source logrd.bash
      logrd-setup --copy-to-console
    
      logrd-set level warn
    
      log-warn "this is a warning"
    
      # log to a file, but copy the messages to the console
      logrd-redirect-stream file --copy-to-console stdlog
    
      log-warn "this warning goes to both file and the console"

DESCRIPTION

    logrd is a bash library which combines a simple logging facility with
    the ability to redirect program output as well as logging to multiple
    output streams.

 Stream Redirection

    logrd improves upon the standard stream redirection schemes by allowing
    writing to multiple streams. For example,

      echo "this goes to the console"
    
      logrd-redirect-stream file1 --copy-to-console stdout
    
      echo "this goes to file1 and the console"
    
      logrd-redirect-stream file2 --copy-to-stream stdout
    
      echo "this goes to file1, file2, and the console"
    
      logrd-restore-streams stdout
    
      echo "this goes to the console"

    Writing to streams other than stderr will be buffered.

    Multiple streams may be directed to a single file:

      logrd-redirect-stream file1 stdout stderr

 Nested stream redirection

    logrd does not keep a history of stream redirection. The
    "logrd-restore-streams" command restores a stream to the state it was
    when logrd was loaded. If the ability to restore streams to
    intermediate states is required, use subshells:

       source logrd.bash
       echo "this goes to the console"
    
       logrd-redirect-stream file1 --copy-to-console stdout
       echo "this goes to file1 and the console"
    
       (
         logrd-redirect-stream file2 stdout
         echo "this goes to file1, file2, and the console"
       )
    
       echo "this goes to file1 and the console"

 Logging

    logrd provides commands which write to the logging stream (stdlog). It
    follows the standard paradigm of mutiple levels of logging:

      error warn notice info debug

    and provides commands specific to each level, e.g.

      log-error "this is at level ERROR"

    as well as the level agnostic command log-to:

      log-to warn "this is a warning"

    The logging stream, stdlog, writes by default to the stderr stream, but
    may be redirected:

      logrd-redirect-stream file stdlog

    The file descriptor associated with stdlog may be obtained via the
    "logrd-get" command.

  Log Formatting

    The logrd-format-message function is responsible for formatting the
    message which will be output. It is passed the log level as well as the
    message to be logged, and should write the formatted message to the
    standard output stream. The default version performs no transformation
    on the message.

 Background

    Stream redirection in the bash shell is usually accomplished either by
    redirecting individual commands' output stream

      echo "to stdout" > file

    or by redirecting the shell's streams:

      exec >file
      echo "to stdout"

    In the latter case child processes will inherit the redirected streams,
    and all further output sent to the standard output stream will end up
    in file.

    It's also possible to send multiple streams to the same file. The
    following redirects the standard output stream, and then makes the
    standard error stream write to the standard output stream.

      exec >file
      exec 2>&1

    Thus,

      echo "to stdout"
      echo "to stderr" >&2

    results in both phrases being written to file.

LOADING

    To load the logrd library, simply source it:

      source logrd.bash

    To efficiently initialize settings, use "logrd-setup"

 logrd-setup

      logrd-setup <options>

    Initialize settings. This should be performed before any logging is
    performed.

    The available options are:

    --copy-to-console

    --no-copy-to-console

      Copy (or don't) all redirected streams to the console (that is, to
      the streams in existence when logrd was loaded). For example, this
      causes

        logrd-redirect-stream file stdout
        ls

      to send the output of ls to both file and to the standard output
      stream

      "logrd-redirect-stream" will also accept this option to restrict its
      application to a single redirection.

    --copy-to-stream

    --no-copy-to-stream

      Copy (or don't) all redirected streams to their original destination
      as well as the new one.

      For example, this causes

        logrd-redirect-stream file1 stdout
        logrd-redirect-stream file2 stdout
        ls

      to send the output of ls to file1, file2, and to the standard output
      stream.

      "logrd-redirect-stream" will also accept this option to restrict its
      application to a single redirection.

    -q

    --quiet

      Set the logging level to error.

    --env-prefix string

    --env-prefix=string

      Set the prefix for environment variables. See "ENVIRONMENT".

    --starting-save-fd integer

    --starting-save-fd=integer

      For older versions of bash (that's you, Apple) logrd needs to search
      for unused file descriptors. This option specifies the first
      descriptor at which to start looking. It defaults to 20, but may be
      set higher if there are conflicts with other code.

    --stdlog-fd integer

    --stdlog-fd=integer

      By default the log stream stdlog is sent to the stderr stream. This
      may be changed with this option. The specified file descriptor must
      already be open.

    --log-level level

    --log-level=level

      Set the logging level. It defaults to warn. It may be one of

        error warn notice info debug

FUNCTIONS

 Errors

    All functions return a status code, and push error messages onto the
    logrd_ERRORS array. There may be multiple error messages in the array;
    the messages at the end of the array arise from higher up the calling
    sequence within the library.

  logrd_has-error

     if logrd_has-error ; then
       handle errors
     fi

    Returns true if the logrd_ERRORS array contains errors.

 Stream functions

    There are three streams upon which logrd operates:

    stdout

      the standard output stream (file descriptor 1)

    stderr

      the standard error stream (file descriptor 2)

    stdlog

      the "standard logging" stream. By default this writes to stderr. Use
      "logrd-get" to obtain its file descriptor.

  logrd-redirect-streams

      logrd-redirect-streams [-fd|-file] target [global options] stream [ stream options ] ...

    Redirect one or more streams to a target. A target may be either a file
    descriptor or a file name. It defaults to a filename; use the -fd
    option to indicate it is a file descriptor.

    The following options are available. If they are specified before the
    streams, they will apply to all streams, otherwise they apply to the
    stream which precedes them.

    --copy-to-console

    --no-copy-to-console

      Copy (or don't) redirected streams to the console (that is, to the
      streams in existence when logrd was loaded). For example, this

        logrd-redirect-stream file --copy-to-console stdout stderr

      causes all output sent to stdout and stderr to be written to file as
      well as to the console stdout and stderr streams.

    --copy-to-stream

    --no-copy-to-stream

      Copy (or don't) redirected streams to their original destination as
      well as the new one.

      For example,

        logrd-redirect-stream file1 stdout
        logrd-redirect-stream file2 --copy-to-stream stdout

      causes output sent to stdout to be written to both file1 and file2

  logrd-restore-streams

      logrd-restore-streams stream stream

    Restore the streams to their state when logrd was loaded.

 Logging functions

  log-to

      log-to $log_level $message

    Write the message to the stdlog stream if the log level is at least
    that specified. The log-level may be one of

      error warn notice info debug

    The current log level may be obtained via "logrd-get"

  log-error

  log-warn

  log-notice

  log-info

  log-debug

           log-error  message
           log-warn   message
           log-notice message
           log-info   message
           log-debug  message

    Write the message to the stdlog stream if the log level is at least
    that specified.

  logrd-format-message

      logrd-format-message $level $message

    Format a message which is to be logged at level $level and write it to
    the standard output stream. This function is used by logrd to format
    log messages. It may be redefined to change the behavior from the
    default, which is to output the message without transformation.

 Global Attributes

  logrd-set

      logrd-set $attribute $value

    Set a global attribute. The following attributes are available:

    level

      Set the logging level; it may be one of

        error warn notice info debug

  logrd-get

      logrd-get attribute

    Retrieve an attribute. Boolean attributes are returned as status
    values, e.g.

      logrd-get copy_to_console && echo 'global copy_to_console is set!'

    Other attributes are output to stdout, e.g.

      log_level=$(logrd-get level)

    The attributes are

    level

      The logging level

    copy_to_console

      A boolean which is true if the global copy_to_console flag is set.

    copy_to_stream

      A boolean which is true if the global copy_to_stream flag is set.

    copied_to_console

        logrd-get copied_to_console stream

      True if the specified stream is being copied to the console.

    starting_save_fd

      The starting file descriptor used. Pertinent only for older versions
      of bash

    stdlog

      The file descriptor for the stdlog stream.

ENVIRONMENT

    Default values for global parameters may be read from environment
    variables. By default the variables have a prefix of LOGRD_ (note the
    trailing underscore); that may be changed by the "--env-prefix" option
    when loding logrd

    The following variables are recognized; see the similarly named options
    in "Loading" for more information

     <PREFIX_>COPY_TO_CONSOLE
     <PREFIX_>COPY_TO_STREAM
     <PREFIX_>STARTING_SAVE_FD
     <PREFIX_>STDLOG_FD
     <PREFIX_>LOG_LEVEL

AUTHOR

    Diab Jerius <djerius@cfa.harvard.edu>

COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

    This software is Copyright (c) 2016 by Smithsonian Astrophysical
    Observatory.

    This is free software, licensed under:

      The GNU General Public License, Version 3, June 2007

